04-Packet-Flow-v2 (#1148)
cosmos/ibc: spec/core/v2/ics-004-packet-semantics/README.md

#### Store paths

> NOTE do we stil need this, or we can retrieve the sequence from the commitment path associated with the clientID? 

Reviewer: We still need this. We want to keep a track of the nonce

- The `nextSequenceSend`, stored separately, tracks the sequence number for the next packet to be sent.

```typescript

> function nextSequenceSendPath(sourceID: bytes, destID: bytes): Path {

Reviewer: This shouldn't be keyed on the string `clients`.

And there's no need for there to be both source and destId. Since we only need our sides' identifier to uniquely key on the channel.

It can just be

`nextSequenceSend/{sourceId}`

    return "nextSequenceSend/clients/{sourceID}/clients/{destID}"
}
```

/* Is all of this Unnecessary? 

NOTE Channel paths and capabilities should be maintained for backward compatibility? 
Channel structures are stored under a store path prefix unique to a combination of a port identifier and channel identifier:

```typescript

> function channelPath(portIdentifier: bytes, channelIdentifier: bytes): Path {

Reviewer: Not necessary

}
```

*/

Constant-size commitments to packet data fields are stored under the packet sequence number:

```typescript

> function packetCommitmentPath(sourceId: bytes, sequence: uint64): Path {

Reviewer: the sequence needs to be in bigEndian format. See ICS24 for details

    return "commitments/channels/{sourceId}/sequences/{sequence}"
}
```

Absence of the path in the store is equivalent to a zero-bit.

Packet receipt data are stored under the `packetReceiptPath`. In the case of a successful receive, the destination chain writes a sentinel success value of `SUCCESSFUL_RECEIPT`. While in the case of a timeout, the destination chain MAY (May?Must?Should?Mmm) write a sentinel timeout value `TIMEOUT_RECEIPT` if the packet is received after the specified timeout.

```typescript
function packetReceiptPath(sourceId: bytes, sequence: uint64): Path {
    return "receipts/channels/{sourceId}/sequences/{bigEndianUint64Sequence}"
}
```

Packet acknowledgement data are stored under the `packetAcknowledgementPath`:

```typescript

> function packetAcknowledgementPath(sourceId: bytes, sequence: uint64): Path {

Reviewer: ditto

    return "acks/channels/{sourceId}/sequences/{sequence}"
}
```

### Sub-protocols

> Note: If the host state machine is utilising object capability authentication (see [ICS 005](../ics-005-port-allocation)), all functions utilising ports take an additional capability parameter.

#### Counterparty Idenfitifcation and Registration 

> A client MUST have the ability to idenfity its counterparty. With a client, we can prove any key/value path on the counterparty. However, without knowing which identifier the counterparty uses when it sends messages to us, we cannot differentiate between messages sent from the counterparty to our chain vs messages sent from the counterparty with other chains. Most implementations will not be able to store the ICS-24 paths directly as a key in the global namespace, but will instead write to a reserved, prefixed keyspace so as not to conflict with other application state writes. Thus the counteparty information we must have includes both its identifier for our chain as well as the key prefix under which it will write the provable ICS-24 paths.

Reviewer: Again we are not focusing on clients anymore as the operative word in ICS4. I think it makes sense to just use channel and perhaps even channelEnd

> A client MUST have the ability to idenfity its counterparty. With a client, we can prove any key/value path on the counterparty. However, without knowing which identifier the counterparty uses when it sends messages to us, we cannot differentiate between messages sent from the counterparty to our chain vs messages sent from the counterparty with other chains. Most implementations will not be able to store the ICS-24 paths directly as a key in the global namespace, but will instead write to a reserved, prefixed keyspace so as not to conflict with other application state writes. Thus the counteparty information we must have includes both its identifier for our chain as well as the key prefix under which it will write the provable ICS-24 paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each IBC channel end MUST have the ability to idenfity its counterparty. With a client, we can prove any key/value path on the counterparty. However, without knowing which identifier the counterparty uses when it sends messages to us, we cannot differentiate between messages sent from the counterparty to our chain vs messages sent from the counterparty with other chains. Most implementations will not be able to store the ICS-24 paths directly as a key in the global namespace, but will instead write to a reserved, prefixed keyspace so as not to conflict with other application state writes. Thus the counterparty information we must have includes both its identifier for our chain as well as the key prefix under which it will write the provable ICS-24 paths.
```

> Thus, IBC version 2 introduces a new message `RegisterCounterparty` that will associate the counterparty client of our chain with our client of the counterparty. Thus, if the `RegisterCounterparty` message is submitted to both sides correctly. Then both sides have mirrored <client,client> pairs that can be treated as channel identifiers. Assuming they are correct, the client on each side is unique and provides an authenticated stream of packet data between the two chains. If the `RegisterCounterparty` message submits the wrong clientID, this can lead to invalid behaviour; but this is equivalent to a relayer submitting an invalid client in place of a correct client for the desired chain. In the simplest case, we can rely on out-of-band social consensus to only send on valid <client, client> pairs that represent a connection between the desired chains of the user; just as we currently rely on out-of-band social consensus that a given clientID and channel built on top of it is the valid, canonical identifier of our desired chain.

Reviewer: Good explanation!!! Let's update for having channel id and client id separate as well

```typescript
function RegisterCounterparty(
    clientID: bytes, // this will be our own client identifier representing our channel to desired chain
    counterpartyClientId: bytes, // this is the counterparty's identifier of our chain
    counterpartyKeyPrefix: CommitmentPrefix,
    authentication: data, // implementation-specific authentication data
) {
    assert(verify(authentication))

>     counterparty = Counterparty{

Reviewer: We should also just consider this a v2 channel and rename.

        clientId: clientId,
        channelId: counterpartyClientId,
        keyPrefix: counterpartyKeyPrefix
    }

    privateStore.set(Map<clientID, counterparty>)
}
```

The `RegisterCounterparty` method allows for authentication data that implementations may verify before storing the provided counterparty identifier. The strongest authentication possible is to have a valid clientState and consensus state of our chain in the authentication along with a proof it was stored at the claimed counterparty identifier.
A simpler but weaker authentication would simply be to check that the `RegisterCounterparty` message is sent by the same relayer that initialized the client. This would make the client parameters completely initialized by the relayer. Thus, users must verify that the client is pointing to the correct chain and that the counterparty identifier is correct as well before using the lite channel identified by the provided client-client pair.

```typescript
// getCounterparty retrieves the stored counterparty identifier
// given the channelIdentifier on our chain once it is provided

> function getCounterparty(clientId: bytes): Counterparty {

Reviewer: This should be mapped to channel ID now

Since the packets are addressed **directly** with the underlying light clients, there are **no** more handshakes necessary. Instead the packet sender must be capable of providing the correct <client, client> pair.

Sending a packet with the wrong source client is equivalent to sending a packet with the wrong source channel. Sending a packet on a channel with the wrong provided counterparty is a new source of errors, however this is added to the burden of out-of-band social consensus.

If the client and counterparty identifiers are setup correctly, then the correctness and soundness properties of IBC holds. IBC packet flow is guaranteed to succeed. If a user sends a packet with the wrong destination channel, then as we will see it will be impossible for the intended destination to correctly verify the packet thus, the packet will simply time out.

#### Registering IBC applications on the router

The IBC router contains a mapping from a reserved application port and the supported versions of that application as well as a mapping from channelIdentifiers to channels.

```typescript
type IBCRouter struct {

>     versions: portId -> [Version]

Reviewer: I don't believe we need this in the router anymore. If the portID doesn't support the version the callback will simply error

    callbacks: portId -> [Callback]
    clients: clientId -> Client

>     ports: portId -> counterpartyPortId

Reviewer: I don't think this is necessary on the router. If the counterpartyPortId is wrong given our portID, it is responsibility of application to error.

##### Sending packets

The `sendPacket` function is called by a module in order to send *data* in the form of an IBC packet. 

Calling modules MUST execute application logic atomically in conjunction with calling `sendPacket`.

The IBC handler performs the following steps in order:

- Checks that the underlying clients is properly registered in the IBC router. 
- Checks that the timeout specified has not already passed on the destination chain
- Stores a constant-size commitment to the packet data & packet timeout
- Increments the send sequence counter associated with the channel
- Returns the sequence number of the sent packet

Note that the full packet is not stored in the state of the chain - merely a short hash-commitment to the data & timeout value. The packet data can be calculated from the transaction execution and possibly returned as log output which relayers can index.

```typescript
function sendPacket(
    sourceClientId: bytes,

>     destClientId: bytes,

Reviewer: Must use ChannelIds

    timeoutTimestamp: uint64,
    packetData: []byte
): uint64 {

>     // in this specification, the source channel is the clientId

Reviewer: We need to remove this assumption

    client = router.clients[packet.sourceClientId]
    assert(client !== null)

    // disallow packets with a zero timeoutHeight and timeoutTimestamp
    assert(timeoutTimestamp !== 0) // Maybe this can be enforced even for unreal timeouts value and not only for 0 
    assert(currentTimestamp()> timeoutTimestamp) // Mmm
    
    // NOTE - What is the commit port? Should be the sourcePort? If yes, in the packet we should put destPort and destID?
    // if the sequence doesn't already exist, this call initializes the sequence to 0
    //sequence = channelStore.get(nextSequenceSendPath(commitPort, sourceID))
    sequence = channelStore.get(nextSequenceSendPath(sourceClientID, destClientID))
    
    // store commitment to the packet data & packet timeout

>     // Note do we need to keep the channelStore? Should this be instead the counterParty store or something similar? Do we keep it for backward compatibility?

Reviewer: It should just be the provableStore

    channelStore.set(
      packetCommitmentPath(sourceClientId sequence),

>       hash(hash(data), timeoutTimestamp)

Reviewer: This is wrong, we need to use the commitment function defined in `PACKET.md`

```typescript
function recvPacket(
  packet: OpaquePacket,
  proof: CommitmentProof,
  proofHeight: Height,
  relayer: string): Packet {
    // in this specification, the destination channel is the clientId
    client = router.clients[packet.destClientId]
    assert(client !== null)

    // assert source channel is destChannel's counterparty channel identifier
    counterparty = getCounterparty(packet.sourceClientId)
    assert(packet.sourceClientId == counterparty.clientId)

    // assert source port is destPort's counterparty port identifier
    assert(packet.sourcePort == ports[packet.destPort]) // Needed? 

    packetPath = packetCommitmentPath(packet.sourceClientId, packet.sequence)
    merklePath = applyPrefix(counterparty.keyPrefix, packetPath)
    // DISCUSSION NEEDED: Should we have an in-protocol notion of Prefixing the path
    // or should we make this a concern of the client's VerifyMembership
    // proofPath = applyPrefix(client.counterpartyChannelStoreIdentifier, packetPath)
    assert(client.verifyMembership(
        proofHeight,
        proof,
        merklePath,

>         hash(packet.data, packet.timeoutTimestamp)

Reviewer: need to use Commitment function defined in PACKET.md

    ))

    assert(packet.timeoutTimestamp === 0 || currentTimestamp() < packet.timeoutTimestamp)

  
    // we must set the receipt so it can be verified on the other side
    // this receipt does not contain any data, since the packet has not yet been processed
    // it's the sentinel success receipt: []byte{0x01}
    packetReceipt = channelStore.get(packetReceiptPath(packet.sourceChannelId, packet.sequence))
    assert(packetReceipt === null)

    channelStore.set(
        packetReceiptPath(packet.sourceChannelId, packet.sequence),

>         SUCCESSFUL_RECEIPT

Reviewer: Must define this
